Katie, is it?
Yes.
Welcome.
We're just going to do a little introduction quickly just for everyone watching.
Yeah.
We'll kick on, get underway.
Okay.
All right. Good afternoon, everyone.
We
are back with the Social Services and Community Select Committee, and we've got two
sub-committees today.
So I'm chairing one sub-committee.
And so I'm Joseph Mundy, the Member of Parliament for Southland and the chair of
the committee. And we'll just go quickly around who else is here.
Hi, I'm Laura McClure. I'm the Act list MP based down in
Christchurch.
Kia ora. I'm Helen White. I'm the MP for Mount Albert.
I've also got a couple of portfolios, the Family and Sexual
Violence Prevention portfolio and Community and Voluntary.
I'm going to be replaced at some point in this committee by
Priyanka Ramakrishnan, who has the Disability portfolio.
Kia ora. My name is Ricardo Menéndez March.
I'm a Green Party MP based in Mount Albert, and I do Social
Development and Employment, as well as Immigration and a few
other portfolios for the Greens.
Welcome, Katie. Thanks for having you this afternoon.
Thanks for coming in to make a submission. The time is yours when you're ready.
Thank you. And thanks for the opportunity.
So to introduce myself, I'm Katie Townsend.
I'm currently a student at Victoria University of
Wellington,
doing political science and public policy.
And
disability is an interest of mine because I am disabled
myself and have several family
friends
in Wellington and Christchurch.
Great. Thanks.
So the first concern is regarding Clause 8
and the family first.
So,
it brings the assumption that
families have
the capability and resources to be able to
provide care
for the disabled member,
which is not always the case.
And
also,
in a lot of cases, it is unpaid.
Mm-hmm.
And those who do get paid, it is usually because they're
eligible for the Supportive Living Payment.
So, some of these
considerations before
providing care, first of all is
willingness. I do understand that family does
have the natural responsibility to provide care,
but that may not always be the case.
It could be because they may not have the financial
resources available, or they may not have the
skills,
especially in cases where the disabled person has complex needs.
And also other commitments, such as other family
members,
and
also
work and,
in some cases, say, the family member may live in
another part of the country or the world.
So,
my recommendation is,
one would be
a carer capacity assessment to make sure
that they do have that capacity to
provide that quality care.
My second concern is regarding Clause 11,
and how the majority of that framework
is passed through secondary legislation,
which, from my understanding,
does not go under the same public debate and
scrutiny as primary legislation.
But it's also,
you have to rely,
because you have to decide
what--
had to put trust on that minister
to serve in
the community's best interests,
and without any safeguards in place-
Yeah
...
those decisions can be made based on government priorities
instead of
the interest in the community.
The third one is consultation.
Yes, there may be some consultation, but for a
framework, it probably would need to be a lot more comprehensive
to make sure,
especially the ministers and the people creating that bill,
understand those real-world impacts,
and make sure
that the objectives
of the disability community and the government align
with each other.
And the final concern is with the bill itself.
First of all, it relies, that's
from my own analysis, it's quite heavily focused on family
circumstances instead of the support needs of the person.
And another one is,
it's quite looked at from a...
If we're talking about disability support services, it focuses
on
care support. And despite when disability support services
provide a lot of other things,
such as housing, transport,
child development services that I have used previously,
education, and
employment services.
And I do believe
if we're doing a framework,
it has to cover everything,
especially in the primary legislation.
And the last one,
it's quite focused on from a social development
point of view.
When you actually--
Because it talks a little bit more about funding allocation-
Mm
... resource allocation,
but disability affects a lot of different things, not just social
development. It affects health, education, employment,
housing and transport, and other sectors.
So,
we do need to have a--
It shouldn't be based on a single department.
It should be more of a cross-agency approach
to make sure it
covers all areas.
Great. Thanks, Cody. I'd love to ask you questions, but we don't have time.
But thank you very much-
Yeah. It's all good
... for your presentation this afternoon. Appreciate it.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Got it. Thank you.
All right, next submitter is Rebecca, I think also in person.
Welcome.
Kia ora.
All right. We've got five minutes with you this evening as well, so time is yours-
Absolutely
... when you are ready.
Cool. Thank you.
Kia ora. My name is Rebecca Collett.
I'm here as a parent of a teenager with high needs who lives at
home.
I'm not very good with eye contact, however, it's important for me to be here today
to look you-
No, thank you
... in the eye.
To say this: please don't proceed with this bill.
Don't find yourselves on the wrong side of history.
This bill will negatively impact yet another generation
of disabled people and their families in
Aotearoa. The fact that this bill has made it to
this stage shows that we have learnt nothing
of how to treat disabled people from the Royal
Commission of Inquiry into Abuse and State Care.
It's a spit on the unmarked graves of disabled people that lived
and died in institutions, and it's the ultimate betrayal, I
think, to the survivors who gave evidence in good faith and trusted in
the process, hopeful that it would help shape a
better future for future generations of disabled people.
We said never again, yet here we are disregarding disabled people's
human rights.
Institutions in the past hid people away, denying
access to education, healthcare, employment, community,
and it feels like this is happening again.
It's same but different. This time it's happening in slow motion
and in full view of all of us.
Institutions of the past were four walls made of brick and mortar.
People were placed far away from family and community.
Now, with supports being stripped back, disabled
people are effectively being controlled and isolated in their own
homes with no free will as to who cares for them, what
services they engage with, and how they live their lives.
I today heard the Minister of Disability saying that this bill will not
change day-to-day life for disabled people and their families.
Funding will stay the same and new means testing will not be
introduced. However, my opinion is that this bill sets the
rules for the future. So it might not change today, but what about
tomorrow?
Making it easier to limit access, cap support, and
remove ability for recourse when the wheels fall off.
The current government might have
the ability to stop the rollout of enabling good lives, to lessen
subsidies for total mobility scheme, to tinker with the
purchasing guidelines of individualized funding,
but the UNCRPD still exists, and the
government has an obligation to support disabled people
to live their lives without barriers.
And families, like my own, who have long
plugged up the gaps in an unsupportive system,
forsaking their own physical and mental wellbeing, will now be
expected to financially support their disabled loved ones on top
of everything else, no matter what their capacity is.
This government continues to punch down on vulnerable
communities to save a buck.
Of all the changes that they can make to disabled people's lives, how is
this the one that they chose to make?
The snowball effect this bill will have for disabled people and their families will
be immense.
For me, if we can't afford to pay a carer for my daughter, I'll have to give up
my own employment, which means I can't provide for my family,
which will detrimentally impact my own
self-worth and mental health, which means I can't be
the mum I want to be to my kids.
This bill should not proceed, and if it must, you should at least extend
the hearing process so you can hear from more people around the
country
who will be impacted by this bill. 19 days for submissions
and five minutes per oral submission for a select
few is negligent, and this is very
anxiety--
It's given me anxiety, but
you have an obligation to listen to as many of the very
people that this bill will impact.
So committee members, please do the right thing,
not the expected thing. Ka mua, ka muri.
Let the past guide how we move forward.
Thank you.
Ooh.
Um
Made it under five.
Well done.
Nice.
Well done. Rebecca. Just a really quick question. Thank you.
What do you see could be some of the worsening outcomes
for disabled people under the bill as it
stands?
I really am concerned about health.
Mental health. I'm concerned
about carers
who are already at their limit that are going to have to
take on more responsibilities, and this will
detrimentally impact our mental health across the board.
Sure. Thank you.
People are already struggling,
and
looking for support in the wrong places. So, yeah, that's my concern.
Thank you.
Oh, thanks, Rebecca. Thanks for coming in and making submissions. I think.
Our next submitter is Sienna via Zoom.
Can you hear me?
We can, yes. Thank you.
Yes.
Oh, welcome, Sienna. So you have five minutes this afternoon.
The time is yours when you're ready.
Oh, thank you. Tēnā koutou katoa. Thank you for
giving me the opportunity to speak today.
I would like to acknowledge the people that have spoke before me.
My name is Sienna, and I'm a mother of a 26-year-old
daughter,
with significant disabilities and complex medical needs
My daughter lives at home and needs full-time support every
day. For the last 26 years, our family has organized our
lives around her care.
With one parent have always stayed at home and the other went to work.
As a result, we have lived on one income for the past 26
years.
This has meant major sacrifices in income, career opportunities,
retirement saving, financial security, along with just the
daily emotional and physical demand of care.
And those challenges are shared by many New Zealand families
across, that provide support for their
family members with disabilities.
We do have a duty of care as families,
but the government also has the responsibility to
support their citizens with disabilities,
and uphold their mana.
This bill is trembling on everybody's mana.
I go to work every day. I don't ask for a lot, but this bill is
just...
It's awful.
Family support should not be substituted for government
support. As a citizen, people with
disabilities should be supported.
My biggest concern about the Disability Support Service Bill,
it seems to be focused more on controls,
reassessment,
management
of financial, instead of the well-being of the people that it's
meant to be providing for.
I'm concerned that the assessment and
reassessment will create even more
uncertainties,
especially for the people with
special needs and their families.
My daughter's special needs are well-documented, so a new assessment
is not going to change what had happened for the last 26
years.
It's just going to create an environment of distrust,
and it's going to create anxiety and insecurity, and it just impacts
the well-being of our whanau. What I
would like to see is a system that is built with
working with us as families with the disability support services,
that can actually look at the real picture and the impact on
families and people with special
needs. Not what has happened
today. This bill was put together so the government can save
money,
and it has not taken our needs. It's not listened to us,
and it is true. The consultation, five
minutes for each speaker.
You are dealing with a group of people that are already tired.
We already give a lot.
Our children don't grow up and leave
and have their own lives and their own careers.
I don't come home from work
and don't have anything to do. I have another job that I come home
to, and that's what it's been like for 26 years.
We want a greater recognition of the family
carers and the contribution that we actually put in.
The fact is that we have to fight for everything.
It's
dehumanizing.
It just makes you feel like you're the worst parent, even though you
really do try as a parent. I go and work full time,
and I come home and I work full time.
And this bill really--
It's awful.
At the heart of it, the bill should ensure that people with disability can live
with dignity, security, choices, and fully participate
in society.
This is not what this bill going to create.
We're not asking for special treatment.
We are asking for fairness, stability, and recognition.
And the government has an ongoing
responsibility for its citizens,
regardless if they are able to work
or not.
My child is a citizen of this country.
I pay my taxes. I'm not actually asking for a lot.
Just please don't change the system so much.
Thank you.
Thanks, Janice. Thanks for making submission.
And look, I'll just make the comment that in my view, it's not doing that.
But we don't have time to go on that.
But can I just make one other comment, because you're the second person to say
this, this afternoon, about five minutes.
The committee's made a decision to give five minutes to every submitter.
There's a lot of people who want to make submissions, so we're trying to hear from
as many as possible, and so it's quite normal for committees to give five minutes
for submitters on bills.
But-
But thanks for making submissions this afternoon
Can I just make a point here?
Yeah, go for it.
There is a limited brief on this. We have to have it back
by the 13th of August, and that's a decision that's been taken by the
minister. So we are in a position that is truncated.
I know-
Oh, but Helen, we as a committee, we decide how much time we set aside-
We couldn't possibly-
And
we're doing it
... we couldn't possibly-
We could
... sit out-
We're doing it
... because we have to have it back because of what the government-
Helen, we could sit three weekends if we wanted to.
So-
It's really important submitters know why we are doing this in
such a rushed fashion.
It's normal, Helen, for committees to do five-minute hearings.
Mr. Chair, could you hand the time, including your time, back to
submitters? Because I don't think this is our time to bicker.
It's their time.
It was not bickering, Ricardo.
I mean, you're literally bickering with presenters.
I think it's been balanced. I think it's been, but yeah
All right. Now, I'm sorry, Luciana, that was not about you.
That was a discussion between committee members with a bit of a political
difference on things. But thanks for making a submission this afternoon.
We appreciate it.
Thank you.
Our next submitter is Claire. Madam President.
Good afternoon. Welcome. Thanks, Claire. All right.
We've got five minutes with you when you're ready. Fire away.
Cool. Thank you.
I just wanted to focus on a few things.
I know a lot of people have talked about the impact this has on people's
lives.
Obviously, I've got disabilities
myself, so I'm a bit invested in this, but I am also somebody who
implements a lot of legislation, and I'm quite concerned with this
particular piece.
Mm-hmm.
The key problems is that it appears to be yet another
panic piece, where it's solely aimed
at shutting down
a specific group of society seeking a remedy
that has been breached in some way, whether it be environmental or whether it be
offshore and seabed with-- and now
we're looking at employment law
based on human rights.
It's ill-considered, and the
result of this would be a declaration
of inconsistency coming through, because it is breaching--
Well, breaching, but it is inconsistent with both
our ratification of the
UNCRDP and
also the Human Rights Act.
And I do also have concerns over the
way it was formed when you consider things like
Section 7.68 of the Cabinet Manual,
Section 5 of the Standing Orders, which
suggest that
whoever creates a bill should be considering things like
the Bill of Rights and really consider good reasons as
to why you
would create
a conflict with that. And right now, the only real conflict
is we have no plan-- the justification, sorry, is that we have no
plan, and we think it's going to cost too much.
So we're going to basically
remove our accountability
to the New Zealand public
by creating this conflict in the Act.
It is also worrying because it childifies people with disabilities.
A child is the responsibility of their family until
they become an adult.
And a child, if they can't be cared for,
their family then becomes the responsibility of the state to step in.
Excuse me. That is essentially what you're
doing with people with disabilities.
You are saying that you will only step in as the
state if the family can't support them, and that puts them on a similar
level as a child.
It also impacts everybody, regardless of disability,
because
this would look at people with age, their working history, and all other
parts of society. It's quite a scattergun piece.
What I think should happen is that we
kill this bill before the election. There are some reasons for that.
And
it bases around the fact that we really need a good trunk of legislation.
A really good piece of legislation is something that it can
endure multiple parties, multiple terms,
multiple philosophies because those principles are really solid.
If you think of the Employment Relations Act that came in in 2000, it's
got a good trunk. You've trimmed around the outside now and again, but
those trunk of principles have remained, and that's what I would like to
see,
this bill be changed to include these really good principles.
I'd also recommend that we look at
things from a horizontal viewpoint rather
than silos. So we've got a disability strategy at the
moment, but it's all about health.
We haven't looked at things like
the intersectionality
between health, education, social services, justice,
infrastructure and transport,
New Zealand Emergency Management and Civil Defense, employment, and other
things. It's a horizontal way of looking at things, and it goes
across the silos. We've got a lot of
strategy and decisions over a silo looking at health
or looking at the ERA reports in education, or we're looking
at
social services. We've not got that nice horizontal look
in how everybody interacts along the way, and that's where some of this conflict is
coming in. So that's where I would like to see us
to start to resolve that. I can see I've got 10 seconds left. Sorry.
No, thank you. Just on that last point, actually, because I think these
people wanting sort of an integrated approach, and I understand that, but this
is about disability support services, which is not education,
it's not housing. It's not these other services which have their own
discrete funding
pots.
They do, but they create
conflict and silos when you look at only disability
support services,
but you're not looking at how they're getting to school.
Or you're not looking at how this impacts the entire
family who are now out of the workforce, for example,
and needing to seek benefits because they're taking care of somebody.
And this interaction all the way across
actually has quite a wide
Impact on a lot of different people.
So it is worth checking that to look for
discrepancies, look at
funding holes, and you're not going to get that view
unless you do those horizontal checks.
It's just a matrix way of doing policy and
legislation checks to make sure that you are being consistent and you
are covering those holes so that you can make really good,
informed decisions, whether it be at budget
time or whether or not it's your policy decision.
If you're not doing those horizontal checks, you're not
looking for the holes and figuring out how to plan to
resolve them. And that's what-
We're well over time.
Yeah.
So I've got the point now. Thank you.
Appreciate you coming to make submissions this afternoon.
Yes, thank you.
All right, our next submitter is Tania in
person.
I think we've got a couple of us preparing.
Was I
right?
Good afternoon. Which one is Tania?
Ah.
I go up and tell you.
Welcome. We have five minutes with you this afternoon.
The time is yours when you're ready.
Kia ora koutou.
I'm here today as a friend and ally of all our
disabilities communities in Aotearoa.
I'm joined by my friend and colleague Juliana and Vera.
It's ironic that I'm the one that gets to speak at this process
because the communities that are affected the most by this bill have
been silenced in this very undemocratic process.
It's really quite shameful.
I was just listening and I'm off script now, but
the speed at which this has been done reminds me of a quote that we
often use in the community.
This is important, so slow down.
Let's really think about that. What's the point of rushing this?
And the other thing I have to wonder about
is why are so many coming to submit.
Something must be wrong.
No matter what Minister Upston tries to tell us or to make us believe,
this bill will change things. It opens up the
loopholes.
So to make things really simple and clear for you, we're going to do a
little role play.
Vera is representing Juliana's family
system.
Vera has an already full life. Vera has
work, whanau commitments, bills to pay,
cleaning and cooking,
and let's try and squeeze in a bit of social life.
Along comes this bill,
shifting the burden. All the things that Juliana
needs,
transport, getting to medical appointments.
Enough.
Enough. This bill rips away our rights.
This bill, you know it's going to do?
It's going to destroy my family quality of
life.
This bill is going to destroy as well my
independence.
And this bill is going to destroy my dignity.
And I'm not being alarmist here, but when I
commit suicide because this bill will make my life so
miserable that that's the only option that I have left,
the blood is on your hands.
And when desperate moms who are exhausted to the bone
kill their disabled children because they can no longer take it,
is their blood in your hands?
But the story doesn't end here.
And there is one thing that this bill cannot take away from
us, and that's our hope.
And I have a message for everyone watching.
History teaches that rights are never handed
down by those with power to those who are oppressed.
Rights are claimed. Women in Aotearoa organized and claimed their
rights to vote. Black communities America organized and claimed their civil
rights. And right now in New Zealand, we are organizing, and you're
giving us a very good push to do that. We are organizing.
We are coming together. We are building power.
And I invite you all listening to this oral submission, visit
the DPA website, learn about finding common ground.
Together the National Leadership for Enabling Good Lives, Te Ao Marama
Aotearoa, Disabled Persons Assembly, we are inviting all the
community to come together and shape a declaration for disability rights in
Aotearoa. This is way more than a document.
This is a tool for us to organize, to unite, and to claim our
rights for us by us. Nothing
about us without us.
Honestly,
let's do the right thing.
Kill the bill.
And the other thing is your maths are so wrong.
You really think you're saving money?
This narrative is so harmful.
And finally, my last message is
they're trying to make us powerless, but
we can vote.
So make sure you enroll,
and let's crip the vote.
Thank you so much.
All right. Our next submitter, Foundation for Equity and Research New Zealand in
person.
Thank you.
Oh,
okay. Cool.
Your family.
Oh.
I think we just want to have
another camera.
Right.
Good afternoon and welcome.
Good afternoon.
Pam, Dr Pam, we've got you online. Can you just make
sure you can hear us
okay?
Yes. Absolutely.
Now, just your camera, if you wanted us to see your face, we can't quite see it at
the moment.
I'm blind, so you might want to give me a wee clue.
Oh, yeah. Just tip the camera upwards a bit.
Yeah, there we go.
Perfect.
Perfect. Thank you.
Thank you.
Thanks so much.
All right.
So look, we've got time with you this afternoon.
So look, welcome and thanks for coming along and making a submission.
Thank you.
Kia ora. My name is Pip McLean.
I hold the disability rights portfolio for the Foundation for Equity and Research
New Zealand, or FERNZ for short.
Joining me today on Zoom is Dr Pam McNeil, who is a member of our Hutt
Valley Disability Focus Community Action Group, and sitting next to me is
Mr Mark Drews, who is co-chair of our Kapiti Disability
Community Action Group.
Today we're speaking on behalf of the FERNZ disability-focused Wellington
Regional Community Action groups.
We'd like to acknowledge that you've asked us to address three questions, and we're
very happy to do that.
Thank you.
The first question you have asked is what changes would you like to see to the
bill? Pam.
The bill must be amended to align with enabling good lives
principles and New Zealand's obligations under the
United Nations Convention on Rights for Persons with Disabilities.
Mark.
Specifically,
pause the bill and undertake a
genuine
consultation and co-design with
disabled people
and remove Clause 8 and
11.3 so that support is
not dependent on family
availability and income
or asset testing.
The second question you've asked us is what is your biggest concern? Pam.
The bill moves disability support services away from a
rights-based model
to a system where decisions are made about us
without us.
Mark.
No real consultation has been
given.
Unfair burdens on
families
and the financial risk and
account taken
of the costs of
disability.
Pam.
The overall concern is that the bill attempts to
infantilize disabled people,
removing our right to agency over our own lives.
Pip.
The third question you've asked is what would your solution
be? Pam.
Genuinely co-design, not merely consult
with disabled people.
Ensure the legislation is grounded in enabling good
lives principles and human rights
obligations. Mark.
The solution,
sorry.
This would include pausing the bill and
redesigning a thorough,
genuine co-design process
led by disabled people,
and ensuring
support is based on
disability-related
need, not family availability,
income, savings, or assets.
Pip.
So in summary: pause the bill,
remove Clauses 8 and 11.3, embed choice and
control protections, and require genuine co-design and
consultation with disabled people before any decisions affecting
disability support are made. Thank you for listening to us.
Oh, thank you very much.
I might just leap in with a question I had in my head
first. I'm wondering,
and I appreciate
the consultation
issues that have been raised. But for example, just around Section 8, it says,
"Family support where appropriate." So obviously, there will
need to be an assessment made about whether it's appropriate to rely on family
support or not. I just haven't heard anyone address that point, because
I think there's been an assumption that-
I'd like to do that
... support.
Sorry, what was that, Dr-
Can I do that? So where appropriate,
who's making the decision where appropriate?
I think what happens with a lot of disabled people is that through our lives,
decisions are made about us without us.
Decisions are made over our lives.
We have no agency, and we fight for that along with our
colleagues and our peers as teenagers and young adults.
And then when we finally get that, we want to keep it.
We don't want other people telling us what's appropriate for us.
But unfortunately, that continues to happen.
And whether your view on what's appropriate family support and my view
are probably going to be diametrically opposed.
Sure. All right. No, thanks for addressing that, Dr Pam. Appreciate it.
Look, thank you to all three of you.
Appreciate you coming and making a submission this afternoon.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you.
Joseph. Thank you. We're up. Who's your friend?
Brian.
Yeah.
Please ignore her.
Oh, no. We'd love to see her. What's her name?
If you want to share, you don't have to.
I beg your pardon?
Oh, just wondering what the name of your friend is.
Brian.
Oh, cheers. Well, lovely to have you here, Joseph.
Thanks for coming and making a submission this afternoon.
The five minutes with you when you're ready.
Thank you very much. Tēnā koutou katoa.
Ko Joseph toku ingoa. I
go by Joe. Thank you for allowing me time
to speak on this very clement Wellington day.
For context, I was
diagnosed, along with my brother and sister,
with Friedreich's ataxia in 2008.
Since I must be very brief, I'll simply say that it is
a rare inherited genetic disorder
that causes progressive damage to the nervous
system.
From the start, I suggest that you either
delete the references to secondary legislation
or scrap
this pretend legislative framework entirely.
A true framework must clearly state our
rightful supports rather than leaving
the substance to unspecified regulations at the
discretion of future ministers. You cannot
have both a robust framework
and the flexibility to chop and change on a
whim.
This bill does the latter while pretending to
be the former.
In simple terms, don't urinate on my
leg and call it rain.
The minister admitted that she's moving quickly because of the
Supreme Court case,
which forced this bill off slower track.
I'm sure she knows, as you do, that
passing retroactive legislation to
spare the Crown's blushes and purse is
dishonorable.
Doing this for the fifth time this
term erodes public respect for the
rule of law,
and perhaps that shame is why it
has been tagged onto a bill that isn't ready.
I live with my sister in an accessible
house owned by my parents.
Whenever there is a gap in support, they fill it,
despite imminent retirement and having
both worked at the coalface of the health
system for over 40 years.
Yet our needs keep growing.
After this bill, are my parents to
be further impoverished?
Is their privacy to be infringed upon by
arbitrary eyes?
In 2011,
the Honorable Tariana Turia listened to and
understood the disability community.
She established trust,
which was strengthened by a degree of
political consensus.
But when the Honorable Penny Simmonds
abruptly issued half purchasing
guidelines and Cabinet
stripped DSS from Whakaha, that
trust was shattered.
No effort has since been made to rebuild that
trust. Consequently, we do not
believe the minister's assurances
that supports will remain
unchanged or that further means testing
won't be introduced. Mr Chair,
you frequently ask submitters if they are aware of the nearly
$3 billion committed to DSS by this
government.
Yes, sir, I am aware. It is a
band-aid. You may not realize that
DSS was chronically underfunded within the
Ministry of Health, masking
its deficits under a larger health
budget, an option unavailable to
Whakaha in 2024.
Instead of consulting the community for a better plan,
the minister panicked, and here we are.
Sir, you also told the Health and Disability
Commissioner on Tuesday that because the
invaluable role disabled people play in their
families and communities is, as you say,
axiomatic,
incorporating that into law would probably
make no difference. But isn't the
principle that families have a duty to
help their disabled kin also an axiom?
Why then
should one be codified in this bill while the other left
out?
Honorable members, whatever you decide to
do, and I hope you recommend this bill
not proceed, your mahi matters.
This process, expedited as it is,
is vital.
Representing all our people in a system is
imperfect, as any evolving
product of humanity really
counts.
You lead lives of consequence,
lives that really,
truly matter.
I hope we do too.
Thank you very much, Joe. A very articulate submission.
And thank you very much for coming and making it through this inclement weather to
come and share that with us. And-
I beg your pardon?
Thank you very much for coming and sharing your very articulate submission with us,
and making it through the inclement weather, as you said.
And I wish you all the best on the journey back with Bree.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Kia ora.
And you very much do matter. Can I just say it as well?
Are we ready to go with the next one, please?
Yeah. Are you ready to go?
Yep.
Cool.
Great. All right, next submitter is David by Zoom.
Good evening, David. Welcome.
Thank you. Kia ora koutou.
Kia ora. We have five minutes with you when you're ready, far away.
My name is David Clark. Thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
I would like to give you some context for who this legislation affects.
My brother is severely disabled.
He developed type 1 diabetes as a child and has been
insulin-dependent for 50 years.
In his early
adulthood, he went deaf and has a cochlear implant.
He subsequently developed rheumatoid arthritis before effective
treatments existed, and he has had elbows and knees
replaced, and his hands are twisted claws.
He struggles to hold utensils and cups.
His mobility is very poor.
Recently, he had one of his legs amputated above the knee because of
poor circulation due to diabetes and
an MRSA infection he acquired while in
hospital. He is stoic and
fiercely independent
and trapped in a body that just doesn't work.
He is alive today because of the support and advocacy
provided by our parents, who are now in their late
80s. Dad will be 89 this week.
They still take him to appointments because his care provider
doesn't have adequate staffing. They communicate with medical
staff on his behalf because he is deaf, and hospital
staff often are unaware that he cannot read their lips when they're wearing
masks.
The current disability support system is not adequate and doesn't
meet my brother's needs.
My elderly parents are the informal supports for my brother.
What happens when they are no longer able to provide support for him
because of their age and their own health issues?
And my parents' situation is by no means unique.
There are many parents of disabled children, young people, and adults
very anxious about what happens to their child when they're no
longer able to provide the necessary support, and many who
struggle to provide that support currently.
This DSS bill embeds language about natural supports and
family responsibility that risks shifting more unpaid
care onto families who are already stretched.
This family's first principle, and an unusually broad
definition of who counts as family, casts an extremely
wide net,
including uncles and aunts, nephews and nieces.
This framework looks less about how communities support
each other, and more like a list of people the state can expect to
step in before public funding is approved.
As Debbie Waters said, do we believe disabled children, young people, and adults
have a right to essential support from the government?
Right now, this bill answers that question through the back door by giving a future
minister the power to introduce means testing by written
notice. There are no safeguards in this legislation, no minimum
floor, no parliamentary approval required.
This DSS bill locks in a charity-era view of
disability, narrows people's choices, and removes existing
rights without proper public input.
Most of the detail of who is eligible, what supports are funded, how
decisions are made, is left to secondary legislation.
Which means that future ministers can change the rules through
regulation without the level of debate in public submissions
that primary legislation requires.
Why does the DSS bill seek to introduce broad
powers
to consider informal support, such as that provided by my parents,
within the core disability support framework?
And what policy outcome is intended that cannot already be
achieved under existing legislation?
A legislative basis for DSS is needed to provide support for my
brother and other vulnerable and disabled people,
but not this insecure, poorly written legislation.
Our disabled children, young people, adults, and their whanau deserve
better.
Thank you.
Oh, thanks, David. I don't see any hands up, so I might take the opportunity.
I've raised this point a few times and appreciate sort of we're
probably benefit of being parliamentarians and having a sort of better
understanding of process. But currently,
ministers can and have for the last 30 years
had carte blanche really in terms of changing
settings through Cabinet minutes or letters.
Having regulation would actually be a significantly more transparent
mechanism for this than has ever been in place before in New
Zealand.
So I don't expect you to... Well, I hear your concern about
regulations and ministers being given that power.
I'll just make the point that,
that would actually be more transparent than has previously been the case.
I see Priyanka shaking her head.
Were you wanting my comment on that?
Yeah. If you wanted to comment on that.
Yeah.
Personally,
transparency doesn't necessarily...
If all you're doing is showing us what you're doing, that still
doesn't provide the ability for public
or legislate for public input on those
regulations.
Oh, I take the point. That hasn't been the case previously for ministerial letters,
et cetera, before.
Are you saying that why are you then
not making it
better than it has been previously?
Is that not what we should be trying to do?
Oh, absolutely, I agree. And I think that's what the intention is.
But look, we take your
concerns on board. So look, thank you for making your submission this
afternoon. Appreciate it.
All right. Thank you for the opportunity.
Thanks, David.
Thank you. Appreciate it.
All right. Our next submitter is Simon also via Zoom.
Thank you.
Welcome, Simon.
Thank you very much.
We have you for five minutes this afternoon. The time is yours when you're ready.
Okay. I'm a primary school teacher, and I've also got a brother-in-law
who is disabled in a wheelchair. And so as a primary school teacher,
I've seen students in a range of disabilities over the last
15 years. I'm also somebody who really believes in personal
responsibility and providing for your family.
But I also really think it's so important that as a society,
we're looking after the people who are most vulnerable, including those who have
disabilities and who are the carers of those people.
And so I really appreciate the work you're doing on this bill, as you mentioned
before, Chairman, and to make it more clear and to help
clear up things where there hasn't been clarity before.
And that's the reason I'm making a submission for the first time today.
And the change that I would really like to see is for you to go even further in
providing that clarity, so that the primary legislation does
include all the definitions of different levels of disability, the support that
is available, that the government will provide, as a society we can
provide.
So people with disabilities and their family and carers
know how they're going to be supported.
I think leaving those things to regulations and secondary legislation
actually increases the uncertainty for people with
disabilities. And if the intention is to clear things up, let's make sure
that there is clarity, because I think that is really fair to people with
disabilities. To say we're going to clear things up and then leave a lot of things
uncertain isn't fair. Secondly, I have a concern
around Clause 8 and the family responsibility.
I think families really want to be supportive of those who are
disabled. And I think in some ways, we need to limit that responsibility
because families have to take on so much.
And so I would like to see that as a society through the government, we
can provide
appropriate levels of support for people with disabilities.
And finally, my understanding of Clause 11 is that the
resources of a disabled person are taken into consideration when
decisions are made about the support for that person.
And I really believe that the support for that person, those decisions should be
made based on need rather than their resources.
And my
biggest concern going forward is that families that are already stressed
are put under even more stress through this legislation or through the
results of what happens.
I think often carers are already stretched.
People with disabilities are already fighting hard for independence.
I became disabled for a short amount of time when I had an injury.
I was playing sports with the kids at school, and I broke my hand.
And I had to be on ACC for a short amount of time.
And so I asked my support worker at ACC, "How can you support my family?
I've got three young kids and my wife." And they said- You've got to fall back on
your natural supports, as this legislation also mentions natural
supports. And if I'd have been single, I would've been able to get
some in-home support. But because I had a wife,
I couldn't get that, which I felt was really unfair on my
wife, who had three young kids to look after.
Her wife was dying of cancer at the time, and now her husband had got an injury.
And so as best I could, I learned to cook with one hand and look after the kids
with one hand. But I realize for a lot of disabled people, they don't even have
that choice to try and get some more independence.
And my concern is we're actually asking people with
disabilities to do that if this legislation moves
forward in that way that there's concerns around as has been
already expressed.
And so I don't want other families to have to face that stress.
And so thank you for your work on this, and thank you for the time and opportunity
to present a submission.
No, thank you very much, Simon.
Yeah. Useful points that you've made, and as many have
over the last few days. But yeah, thank you for that.
And it's a point we'll take away. And I think there has been definitely a
number of people who've expressed concern about the secondary legislation.
And I guess
we'll seek some advice on whether there's more clarity that can be provided and the
primary legislation to address those concerns.
No, appreciate it.
That's really great to hear. Thank you.
Thank you.
All right, our next submitter is Suzanne, also via Zoom.
Jesus.
Sorry.
Oh, no worries. Yeah.
Here I am. Right.
No, we got you now. We can see you loud and clear, and hear you as well.
So look, welcome to the committee this evening. And when you're ready, fire away.
Tena koutou. I would like to thank the committee for the opportunity to speak
today. Ko Suzanne Phibbs ahau. I'm a disabled person
and carer for a family member. Professionally, I have a PhD and
teach disability studies. I do not support this bill.
I would like to dedicate this submission to Casey Aubrey, 17 years of
Fielding, and Ruby Knox, 20 years of Nelson, who are both
killed by their mothers, partly due to the stress of being unsupported primary
caregivers for their severely disabled autistic children.
I would like to provide the following feedback to the committee.
In relation to funding,
I would like to acknowledge the funding increase for disability support
services provided by the government.
However, this funding is over four years or 250 million per
year. The vast majority of that funding went to top up residential care
services, disability provider organizations, and to fund wage
increases within the sector. In general,
families did not see increase in funding support or entitlements.
Disability support services funding increases have not kept pace with inflation,
population growth, or need. New Zealand spends approximately
0.5% of GDP on public disability support services,
which is well below the OECD average, where similar developed nations
typically spend over 2% of GDP in this
area.
Means testing.
Current means testing is narrowly applied in the area of disability support
services and does not apply to individualized funding, carer support,
and individualized budgets. Like healthcare services, access is
based on assessed need, not ability to pay.
New Zealand has established legislative mechanisms for income and asset
testing, such as the Social Security Act 2018 and the
Residential Care and Disability Support Services Act 2018.
What policy outcome is intended through the introduction of broad powers to
consider financial circumstances and informal supports that are
not covered within existing legislative mechanisms?
In relation to family support, I would like to speak to social isolation.
Significant numbers of tāngata whaikaha and their families experience high
degrees of social isolation. What advice has the government received
around how social isolation will impact the ability of tāngata
whaikaha and their families to draw on wider support networks?
There are more than 40,000 children caring for adults in New
Zealand. What advice has been received regarding how the bill will impact
this group of people?
Exploitation and abuse. 49% of tāngata whaikaha
experience sexual and/or family violence.
What advice has the government received regarding how this bill will ensure
safeguarding for disabled people in unsafe situations?
Increased demand for residential care.
What advice has the government been given about how the bill will increase demand
for residential care for disabled people at a cost of between
$75,000 and $116,000 per person per
year, which is significantly more than it would cost for disabled people
to be cared for within their families.
Codifying disability support services and legislation.
I welcome the identification of the need to codify disability support services and
legislation, but not
the proposal that is currently on the table.
It's not fit for purpose, it's rushed and unconsidered, and in short, it's a
dog, particularly as it will reduce the rights and freedoms of tāngata
whaikaha and their whānau.
I would like to remind the committee that certainty in legal frameworks is not the
same as security for tāngata whaikaha and their families in real life,
particularly as the government has a track record of making unilateral
decisions around disability support services, as was the case
with total mobility
funding
The bill in its current form should be rejected as any legislation needs to
involve genuine good faith consultation and co-design with tangata
whaikaha, their whanau, and the disability community.
I live in Palmerston North, one of the pilot areas in which Enabling Good
Lives
was rolled out. Individualized funding and tailored personalized budgets
provides choices for disabled people, enable them to determine their
own futures and to live ordinary lives.
In evaluation of the program, I identified increased independence,
improved self-confidence, and enhanced access to mainstream and natural
community supports compared to traditional needs assessment models.
This is the model that should be consulted upon for codification
in legislation. Thank you.
Thank you. Quick question, Priyanka.
That was actually my question.
Oh.
Do you find it concerning that the EGL model of DSS funding
is not codified into this legislation?
Yes, it should be codified into the legislation.
Yes. Thank you.
All right. Thank you. So Suzanne, a very
information dense and rich submission. So thank you.
That gives us a few things to
consider as a committee. Appreciate you making a submission this evening.
Thank you.
All right. Our next one is David Chalk via Zoom.
All right.
Just quickly, my wife is at work and my son is with me.
If he-
Yeah, no worries
... rocks up, you might get a
bit of a surprise visit. Anyway.
All right.
When you're ready, fire away.
Yep. I'm away. Thank you. Thank you chair, members of the committee.
I'm David
Chalk. Can you still hear me?
Yep, I still hear you.
Sorry, the audio just went really weird on me.
That's okay.
Okay. So I am David Chalk, father of Bess Sebastian, my
non-speaking autistic son.
Bess communicates by spelling one letter at a time on a letterboard,
a method called Spelling to Communicate.
I'd hoped to bring him to the beehive today so you could hear him in his own words.
Two weeks notice wasn't enough time to make that happen.
I hope he gets another chance.
You asked three things. The change we want, our biggest concern, our
solution. I'll answer all three, but I start where a father
starts,
with my son.
On his letterboard, Bess has views and expresses them
like anyone would typing on a keyboard.
The world mistakes not speaking for not thinking.
Even the term non-verbal,
without words,
assumes he has no words to say.
This bill is built on that mistake.
Schedule One, Clause Six lets someone make
decisions for him on a best interests test
as if he cannot decide.
It even states they should seek his views,
then lets them act on their own view of his interests anyway.
My son who can answer, that's the wrong standard.
Article 12 of the UN Disability Convention, which we ratified,
says his will and preferences must govern, not someone else's view of
what is good for him.
I support legislative foundation for disability support.
We have needed one for years,
but I oppose this bill as it's currently drafted.
My concern is not the funding level,
it's the delegation of power,
transparent or not.
What decides whether Bess gets support,
who is eligible, on what criteria, whether his income and assets
are tested,
is not in this bill.
It is left to instruments a minister can rewrite carte blanche
by notice. No vote, no hearing like this one.
Clause 11 (3) builds the machinery for means testing
income and assets by ministerial notice.
Primary law that leaves the detail that matters in secondary
legislation escapes the scrutiny you give this bill today.
A power you are promised won't be used
is still a power this legislation grants.
There is a cost this bill doesn't count.
Clause 8 makes my family the support of first resort for
life.
Reaching past me to Bess's siblings and cousins.
He has no relationship with his cousins.
Before the system steps in, it states, "Where appropriate,"
but never defines who decides that,
never asks whether they're willing, or whether Bess wants to live with them.
The UN's own guidance on the convention, General Comment 5, says
making family default carer is a breach of Article 19,
the right to live in the community with choices equal to others.
It falls hardest on my daughter, Izzy, Bess's sister.
The clause writes her future into his support plan.
The career she takes,
whether she can move for work, the family she might one day
have. It treats her life as a solution. It never asks her.
Love given freely should not become an obligation legally assumed.
And notice how we got here.
There was no consultation with disabled people before introduction.
The government's own regulatory impact statement concedes it, and
concedes it may breach the UN convention.
The bill itself never mentions that convention once,
nor Enabling Good Lives.
The approach disabled people built for themselves,
a bill that redefines disabled people's rights, written
without them,
and rushed. It has not followed due process,
and there's enough people on the committee that have had
the background to know that
And I know it's not your bill.
And there is one line this bill crosses that should trouble all of you.
It bars a whole group,
disabled people's family carers, from taking their claims
to court or tribunal,
and the only reason it offers for this is cost.
Under the convention, cost is never a lawful basis to deny a disabled
person access to justice.
That argument may be open under our own Bill of Rights.
Under the convention we signed, it's not.
Whether or not it's established, we should all worry about a law that takes away
people's access to legal process.
So the change I want and my solution are the same, and it costs nothing.
Put the substance back into the primary act.
Eligibility, the criteria, and whether anyone is income or asset
tested, the Social Security Act already does this.
Nothing really changes.
Writing that flaw into law costs nothing.
I don't understand why we would resist it.
I don't understand why we wouldn't have done that.
My written submission sets out eight recommendations.
I ask you to read them, but I note that that was done in a hurry, because
I work and I have
my son.
But the one thing to take from me today, please, Bess did not choose to be
non-speaking, and we did not choose the unpaid work of giving him a good life,
but we do it gladly with honor.
I ask only that the law not treat that work as invisible.
My family is a means test asset pool, while my son's voice
is unnecessary in his own life. He has a voice.
He spells it out one letter at a time.
This bill should be amended until it can hear him.
Thank you. I'm sure I'm over time, but I welcome any questions if you have them.
Oh, look, thank you very much, David.
A compelling submission, and you've given us some good
points to think about. So look, really appreciate that, and thank you for the
work you and your family do. And please give our best regards
to Bess as well, and hopefully we'll get to see him at some point in the future.
Thank you.
Cheers.
The next submitter is Red, also
by Zoom.
Welcome, Red. Good evening.
Tēnā koe.
Yeah.
Tēnā koutou katoa.
All right, excellent. Our time is yours when you're ready. Fire away.
Here I stand as Te Whakatōhea and Ngāti Ira.
My name is Red Nicholas. Thank you for the opportunity to speak with you
all today.
First of all, I just want to mihi to all the disabled people, whānau and carers who
have already made powerful submissions on this bill.
I echo many of their sentiments
and will defer to their expertise on many of the matters that go beyond the
disappointingly small time allocation we've been given to speak with you today.
I'm a proud disabled person,
uh, and I have serious reservations about this bill and believe it must not proceed
in its current form.
As it stands, this bill will cause significant harm, restrict disabled
people's potential, and increase the burden that our whānau carry.
Most importantly, it does not uphold the disability rights mantra of nothing
about us without us.
People far cleverer than myself have made articulate and substantial
cases addressing the flaws of this legislation.
So today, instead, I want to tell a different story.
I want to tell a story of what it looks like when disabled people are supported to
live the life of their dreams.
I'm 39 years old.
I have cerebral palsy. I'm a full-time power wheelchair user. I also have a family.
I have a wife and three tamariki. I run a business.
I'm an active member of society and contribute to my community.
My story of being disabled is tragically not the norm in Aotearoa, but it
should be. It should be normal for disabled people to be present and visible
throughout our society. It should be normal for disabled people to be in workplaces
across our country. It should absolutely be normal for disabled people to have
loving relationships and children and live the life they choose.
But sadly, for so many of our people, these dreams are made impossible because of
punitive, low trust, bureaucratic and restrictive models of support,
models that will be reinforced and entrenched through this piece of legislation.
So I want to show you what it looks like when a system gives disabled people,
actually gives disabled people the support they need.
First of all, it looks like trust. When I was growing up as a young adult 20
years ago, I was trusted by Work and Income.
They asked me: "What support do you need?" I told them, and they backed me with
whatever support I needed to get into employment.
When I first needed support for my personal cares, I was also felt, feel,
feeling trusted. I was trusted to know what I needed and who
was best placed to provide that support.
Sometimes it was whānau, sometimes it was others.
But critically, it was my choice, and I was never asked to
prove that my family refused to help me before other
support was offered. I was never made to feel like a burden, where my family had to
go give up their own hopes and dreams in order to support me forever
for free under the guise of natural support that this bill seeks to
enshrine.
Disabled people, we know what we need. We know what good looks like.
We are experts in our own lives. Some of us want to be supported by our
whānau, and when that happens, we expect them to be appropriately
compensated. Our burden complex is real, and the last
thing we need is the government adding to it.
For example, I currently pay my wife for some of my, uh, support hours.
That is a tricky thing for our marriage to navigate, but it was our choice, and we
make it work. If she had to support me forever for free,
as this bill proposes, maybe even my children, I suspect those
relationships would suffer greatly.
If this bill is all about putting the building blocks of DSS in place, as the
minister claims, then let's do that.
If it's all about setting the foundations of DSS, let's do that.
I'm not here to say that DSS is perfect right now.
I'm not here to say that nothing needs to change, but this bill is not it.
This is a sneaky bill. The minister said in a recent video, and I quote,
"This bill is only step one. Then we need to put more
detail around it." Well, show us the
detail. If there is nothing to hide, then let's have the conversation out in the
open. Let's involve disabled people at every stage rather than
creating a blank check for yourself through inept secondary legislation without
consultation.
The minister wants to make it clear that this bill, quote, "Doesn't change anything
for any disabled person today." Well, that might be true, but it certainly
lays the foundation for lots to change at any point in the future,
which wouldn't require consultation with disabled people, in clear breach of the
United Nations Convention. None of this process reflects a relationship with
disabled people built on trust or respect.
It reeks of cowardice, of sneakiness, and derision.
Consider how different this bill would feel, how different this process would feel,
if it was developed through that lens of trust, through a lens of
self-determination and partnership as enshrined in Te Tiriti,
of belief in the potential of disabled people.
If you want to build the foundations of DSS, then let's do that together in
partnership. But stop trying to pull the wool over disabled people's eyes,
because we deserve better than that.
My story is proof that well-funded support delivered through a lens of trust and
agency can enable amazing outcomes.
This should be the norm for every disabled person in Aotearoa.
Unfortunately, this bill takes us further away from that reality,
not closer, and I urge you to reject it. Kia ora.
Kia ora. Thanks, Reid. Thank you for sharing that powerful story with us.
And I agree, that is the objective that we want to get to.
So,
thanks for raising that flag. Appreciate it.
Kia ora.
All right. Our next submitter is Luka, also by Zoom.
Hi.
How are you?
Yeah, very good. Yeah, how about yourself?
Been good.
Yeah, nice.
Just a bit nervous.
Oh, no. No worries. This is a friendly space.
Just-
Yeah
... have a bit of a yarn and tell us what you think.
Okay. So, kia ora. I'm Luka.
I live a mainstream life.
Cool.
I went to mainstream school,
and I have been to AWA
at my local politic.
I had a
choose-
Choice
... choice have a job at the bar.
Right.
And swim at my local club.
I choosing to do things
just like everyone else.
How you just-
Yeah
... now you're deciding my future without
discussing
it with me.
I would like to go flatting.
I would like be independent my
life.
My family do much for me,
with me, but they can't do it all.
I need support.
I can
contribute-
Contribute
... to my community.
I have a good life.
That means having a government,
having some social responsibility.
My friends
have a very l-
Certainly, you making me scared about my future.
Oh, thank you. Thank you, Luka, and thank you very much for making that submission.
We want you to feel very empowered about your future.
Yeah.
So, we'll do everything we can to make sure that we can help get that message
through, and make sure we do what we can to shape this up in a
way that you feel empowered, because that's ultimately absolutely what we want.
Yeah. Thank you.
Look, thank you so much. You made a very good submission.
Very articulate and appreciate you making the time to share that with us this
afternoon.
Yeah.
Yeah. Awesome.
Cheers. Well, have a good evening. Appreciate it.
You too.
Thanks.
All right. Next submitter, also by Zoom, is Ronnie.
Oh,
there you
go.
Is that thing on me?
There we go. We got-
Sorry, got a bit nervousness and pushing the wrong buttons, I think.
We can see and hear you, so it's all fire away when you're ready.
Okay, cool.
Tena koutou katoa. Thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak with you.
Ko Ronnie Robinson memorabilia toku ingoa.
I'm a disabled Maori woman living with a lifelong impacts
of severe childhood
burn injuries. When I was 18 months old, both my feet were severely burnt in
a bath of hot water.
As a result, I eventually lost nine toes.
Although my support mainly comes through ACC, I know that the disability
policy affects all disabled people.
It affects our whanau, our communities, and the generations that are yet to
come.
Even after almost 50 years, I am still living with the consequences of these
injuries.
My biggest concern about the bill is the direction it may take.
To me, it feels like disabled people will have to keep proving themselves
over and over again to get the support we need.
Living with disability is already exhausting.
We live with pain, fatigue, surgeries, appointments, and barriers that many
people never see. We shouldn't also have to fight the
very system that is supposed to support us.
For me, disability isn't just about my feet.
It affects how I walk, how long I can stand, my mobility, my
independence,
my mental wellbeing, and my ability to participate in everyday
life,
and my ability to be a part of my community.
I've had multiple surgeries throughout my life, and I'm still having surgeries
today. My most recent surgery was only a couple of months ago, and I'm due to have
more surgery next week.
What should be recognized is that support needs can change over time.
As we age, our bodies change,
our conditions change, and the support we need can change, too.
Another concern I have is that disability
cannot always be reduced to a diagnosis,
a code, or a checklist.
Different doctors and specialists can have different
opinions, so
to describe the same condition in
different ways. If access to support depends too heavily
on a diagnostic label or ticking boxes, there is a real
risk that disabled people won't receive the support they actually need.
Support should be based on the whole person, how disability
affects everyday life, and what will enable us to live independently,
participate in our communities, and contribute to society,
not just on what is written on a medical record.
The hardest part has often not been my disability itself, it's been
navigating systems where I feel like I have to keep
explaining, justifying, and proving my needs every time they change.
That takes a huge emotional toll.
I worry that this bill will make that even harder for many disabled people.
As Māori, disability doesn't just affect one person, it affects the whole
whānau.
Whānau will always support each other because that is what we do.
But support from whānau should be a choice, not an
expectation, because services aren't there.
Disabled people should be able to rely on the services that are designed
to support us, not solely on our families to fill the gaps.
I know from my own journey that getting support isn't just about whether it exists,
it's about whether people can actually access it when they need it.
There is little point having support available on paper if people can't
access it because
of where they live, long waiting lists, transport barriers,
or complicated processes.
When support is difficult to access, the pressure doesn't disappear, it
simply shifts
onto parents, partners, children, siblings, and carers.
That places enormous emotional, physical, and financial pressure on
whānau.
Good disability support doesn't replace whānau, it strengthens them.
It allows disabled people to live with greater
independence while allowing our whānau to be our whānau,
not our only support system.
My request to the committee is please listen to disabled people.
Design a system that recognizes that our needs change over time, and that
support should reflect our lives, not just a diagnosis or a
checklist. Make support accessible,
timely, consistent, and based on trust and
dignity so disabled people can rely on it when they need
it.
Awesome. Thanks so much, Ronnie. I appreciate you coming and making a submission to
us this evening and sharing your
life experience and perspective.
Much appreciated.
Thank you.
Kia ora.
All right. Next one also by Zoom is Pip, I believe.
Cool.
Hello.
Oh, hello, Pip. Good evening. Welcome.
Good, thank you. I'd like to share my screen, if that's okay.
Yeah, no worries.
I'm hoping it will work.
Yep. There we go.
Yeah. Can you see that?
Yep. Sure can.
Can you see?
Yep, we can.
What can you see? Okay.
We can see a smiling face.
Right. That's good.
Yep.
So this is my daughter, Lucy.
She is in the house with me today, and I'm sitting in my lounge with my other
daughter and my grandson.
Oh, okay.
I want to share with you
about my daughter, Lucy. Her name is Lucy Brunn,
and this submission is from her voice
as best that I can
share it.
Okay.
So I am a disabled person, and I need lots of support every day, and
I will need support my whole life. I cannot speak these words myself,
so my mum is speaking on my behalf based on her knowledge of
me, my communication, my experiences, and what is
important to me. I may communicate differently,
but I still have a voice. My voice is often lost and
ignored completely.
But I still have feelings, I still have dreams, and I still have the
right to be heard and understood. When you decide what to do, please can
you think about me, not as a policy, not as a funding
packet, not as a cost, but as a person
I love dancing. I love making people smile.
I love being around people. I love seeing
other people happy. Like everyone else, I want to feel safe.
I do belong, and I deserve to be included.
What I need you to understand most is that relationships
matter. For me, relationships are everything.
The people who support me are not names on a roster.
They are not hours on a budget sheet. They are people.
Support workers have come into my life, and some have been wonderful.
Some have been very important to me, but eventually, they leave.
When they leave, I lose a relationship.
I lose trust. I lose someone who understood me,
and then I have to start all over again.
Imagine your best friend, your husband, your wife, your brother or
sister suddenly disappearing from your life without explanation.
I don't understand why people leave.
I don't know why they're not coming back.
I don't know whether I have done something wrong.
I just know that they've gone, and that loss is very real.
My family are different. They have been beside me my whole life.
They know what makes me laugh. They know when I'm frightened.
They know how I communicate when words are hard.
They know what helps me feel calm.
They know how to help me participate in the community, and they
know how to help me. All general. Now I can't see what I'm
reading.
That knowledge has been built over a lifetime. It comes from love.
It comes from commitment. It comes from never giving up on me.
Believe me when I tell you, people have given up on
me. When I was 14, my mom was told
that if I hadn't learned certain things by then, I never would.
But she didn't give up on me. I am now 27, and I am
still learning.
I may not learn the same things as everyone else, but that doesn't mean what
I learn doesn't matter.
My family's expertise should be valued.
Two of my sisters are now professional support workers.
They support other disabled people every day.
They learned many of those skills because they grew up with me.
Because of me, they understand patience, they understand
communication, they understand that relationships matter.
My life has shaped theirs just as much as
their lives have shaped mine.
All of my sisters are talented. I love to watch them sing.
I cannot sing. I can barely talk.
I'm just going to stop the sharing now.
So yeah, I can't barely talk, actually. I am profoundly deaf.
But I can dance, and I am really good at dancing.
When I dance, people smile,
and people laugh. And when I dance, other people feel
happy, and being happy makes
other people want to do good things.
So my making them happy
makes them want to do good things.
But you know what? I don't know my auntie, I don't know
my uncle, I don't know my nana, and even my cousins.
Why should they
be made to all of a sudden take care of me when they know nothing about
me at all? Who gets to decide
who looks after me when my mom and my dad
can't? I'll tell you who should decide. It should be me.
It should be Lucy.
Right. Sorry, I just need to find my place.
It's harder to read off my phone.
Right. So disabled people are not just people who receive support.
We contribute, too. We bring joy, and we bring love.
We help shape families, communities, and futures in ways that are
unseen, ignored, and undervalued,
and we matter.
I want you to think about my family and your family.
They have their own dreams, and they have their own goals, their own
relationships, their own lives that they want to live.
I do not want the people I love to have to give up their futures just so that I can
have a future.
I do not want them to have to choose between supporting me and pursuing their
own aspirations. Would you truly be able to make that decision for
yourself without feeling just a little bit sad about it?
A good disability support system should allow both things to be true.
Disabled people should be able to have good lives,
and the people who love and support them should be able to live good lives,
too. I know that not every disabled person has a say family.
Some people have been hurt by family, and some people have been hurt by others that
they trusted. But everyone deserves support from people they trust
and to be safe. That is why I am not asking for family
or natural support to be forced on anyone.
I mean, what is that anyway? It's not really natural for
anyone to help me take a shower, is it? It's not.
My dad doesn't want to do it, and I certainly don't want a stranger to do it.
You know, really. Do you really want a stranger staring at your butt?
That is something that Lucy would say.
But actually,
that is what
so many people have to put up with.
So
if that has to happen, we should at least have someone we trust.
I'm asking for disabled people to have the right to choose.
For some people, it's family, and for some, it's not.
Both choices deserve respect. If you can't tell already,
I think I should make it very clear that this bill makes it
easy for those choices to be taken away.
Ministers have said support is not intended to change right now,
but this bill allows for any changes to be made in the future without even asking
me.
Real safety
is not built on promises. It's built on protections.
Disabled people should not have to rely on hope.
Please protect our right to choose who supports us
and recognize that family expertise has value.
Treat family members as fairly
when they provide the same support that would otherwise be
provided by paid support workers,
and listen to us.
When you think about this bill, please think about all the disabled people
like me.
People who want what everyone else wants, to belong, to be safe, to be
respected, to be loved, and to have a say in who walks
beside them in their life. My name is Lucy.
I am deaf.
I have an intellectual disability.
I have a rare chromosome disorder.
There is actually no one in the world like me, but actually, there's no
one in the world like you either.
But you can speak for yourselves. I need help to
speak for me. But what I think still matters.
I am Lucy, and I am a dancer, and I matter.
And that is enough for me.
Thank you very much, Pip, for sharing Lucy's voice.
And what a great voice it is.
And thank you
for-- Please thank Lucy on our behalf for making that
great submission and also sharing
a very
photographic visual representation of her life as well as her thoughts.
Appreciate it.
Thanks. Thank you. Good luck, everybody.
Cheers.
Thanks.
Thank
you.
All right, our next submitter is Thea, also via Zoom.
Oh,
hang on. I think. Hello. Can you hear me?
Hello. Yep, we sure can.
Hi.
Hiya.
I-
Now, are you wanting to have a video as well or
are you okay?
I think I can. I'm not sure. I'm on my phone. Oh, here it is.
Oh, there we go. Yep.
Yeah.
Perfect. All right.
Welcome. Great to see you.
Kia ora.
Yeah, kia ora.
Thank you.
All right. Well, the time is yours when you're ready.
Oh, thank you.
Well, kia ora koutou.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
I know that we've only got a very short space of time, so I've taken it
that you've read my submission.
So I thought I'd just go straight to the questions because I've answered the three
questions that you provided.
Thank you for that.
Yeah. I've worked in the field for 25-plus years working with
families and children and youth. And
by way of working in the field,
I've worked with many families with disabilities.
So I'm coming from that angle as having worked in the
field as a field worker and a psychologist.
The first question asks, what changes do you want to see
to the bill?
I would like stronger protection for disabled people and their families
written directly into legislation rather than left
to future ministerial policies and regulations.
Specifically, remove wording that suggests family
are primarily responsible for providing care and
recognize that disability supports is a shared public responsibility.
Include clear statutory rights to disability support,
participation, independence, choice, and inclusion.
Establish an independent appeals and complaints process from
the outset, allowing tāngata whaikaha and their
families to challenge decisions that affect their support.
Require meaningful engagement with disabled people,
tāngata whaikaha Māori, whānau, disability support providers,
and representative organizations before significant
policy on funding changes are made.
Prevent significant reductions in support levels,
eligibility,
or service access through policy discussions alone by requiring
parliamentary oversight or legislative amendment.
I'm up to six now. The bill should explicitly acknowledge Te Tiriti o
Waitangi and the Crown's obligations under it.
This should include requirements for genuine partnership with tāngata whaikaha
Māori, their whānau, hapū, iwi, and Māori disability
providers in decision making, policy development, service
design,
and monitoring. The bill should support shared decision-making and
equitable outcomes for Māori, recognizing that Te Tiriti
obligations extend beyond consultation to active
partnership and accountability.
The next question asks, what is your biggest concern?
My biggest concern is that the bill shifts responsibility for disability
support away from government and onto families
while providing fewer legal protections.
In my work with children and families, I see the significant amount of
unpaid care that families already provide.
If access to formal support can be restricted, reduced, or changed
through policy decisions rather than legislative protections,
families will be expected to carry an even greater burden.
This creates uncertainty for disabled people and their families and
increases the risk that essential supports will not be available when they are
needed.
Next point, the consequences are likely to be significant.
Children may miss opportunities for development, education,
independence, and participation in their communities, while parents
and caregivers may experience increased stress, burnout, financial
hardship, and reduced ability to stay in employment.
And many of the families that I've worked with have struggles in
those particular areas. And some of them have had to leave their jobs as a
result.
I am concerned the bill does not reflect adequately the Crown's
obligation under Te Tiriti o Waitangi.
Maori already experience inequities in access to disability supports
and outcomes. If responsibility for care increasingly shifts to
whanau without corresponding investment, support, and
partnership, the burden is likely to fall disproportionately on Maori
whanau. Rather than reducing inequities, this
risks entrenching and widening existing disparities for tangata
whaikaha Maori, their whanau, their communities,
their hapu, their iwi.
The last question asks: what are your solution, what would your
solutions be?
My solution would be to build that bill around a rights-based
approach, that provides certainty,
accountability, and genuine partnership with disabled people, their
families, whanau, hapu, and iwi. The bill should promote
fairness, equity, participation, inclusion, and self-determination for
all disabled peoples while recognizing the unique
status and rights of Maori under Te Tiriti o Waitangi.
To give effect to these principles, the bill should require that disabled people
and tangata whaikaha Maori to be actively involved in the design,
delivery, and evaluation
of policies and services that affect them.
It should also establish clear equity objectives,
require regular public reporting on outcomes, and provide
mechanisms for holding government agencies accountable
when equitable outcomes are not achieved.
And I've seen this happen in my time working in the field.
This approach would uphold dignity-
Yeah
... recognize both individual and collective
wellbeing, and ensure that the needs, aspirations, and
rights of all disabled people are reflected in decision-making.
Whanau should never be put in a position of carrying responsibilities
that properly belong to the Crown.
Furthermore, under Te Tiriti o Waitangi, the Crown has obligations to actively
protect the wellbeing and equitable outcomes of tangata whaikaha
Maori. This bill should strengthen these obligations, not
create uncertainty about them.
The test of this bill should not be whether it saves money in the short term.
The test should be whether it gives tangata whaikaha, children, young people,
and their whanau the support, dignity, certainty, and
opportunities they need to thrive.
Kia ora.
Kia ora. Thank you very much, Thea.
Thank you for that very considered submission, and also your written submission as
well.
And for obviously sharing from that perspective of, was it 23 or 24 years
in the-
25 plus
25 plus. 25 plus.
Yeah.
Been around for a while. Yeah.
Yeah. No, awesome. No, thank you so much.
And very interesting-looking books you've got behind you there as well.
Oh.
But no. Look, thanks so much for coming and sharing that with us this evening.
Thank you. Thank you for your time. Kia ora.
Thank you. Kia ora.
Kia ora.
Our next submitter, we're moving to Sharon, also by Zoom.
Hi.
Oh, good evening, Sharon.
You can see me all right, hear me all right?
Yep. No, I got you loud and clear here. Visual and audio.
So look, welcome, and the time is yours when you are ready.
Cool, thank you. So hi, my name is Sharon Cook, and my greatest
achievement in life is the three amazing adults I've had the privilege of raising.
The first child who came into my life and my heart was through an ad in a
Wellington newspaper saying, "Wanted good home for an eight-month-old baby
girl with special needs." Imagine that.
I rang CYFS, and two months later, this very small 10-month-old baby became my
foster child. Now at the age of 35, she's a grown woman who
touches the hearts and lives of all she meets.
She was given an official diagnosis of Lissencephaly syndrome, which
is a rare and life-shortening condition.
No one envisaged her living to this grand old age.
Now, many years later, with multiple diagnosis, she lives an amazing life,
embracing it to the fullest and to the fullness of her potential, with
supports in place to enable her to live in her community with our family
as her backup plan. Sometimes we are her only plan.
She requires 24/7 care due to her high and complex
needs and intractable epilepsy. My husband and I provide
some of this care alongside others.
Parenting my son came through adopting a little fellow with Down syndrome.
He came to us at two weeks of age and is now a 31-year-old powerlifting champ
and artist. Our third child
is affectionately known as our favorite biological child.
She gave herself that title.
Life with two children with special needs has always been challenging.
Not only is there everyday life to cope with, but add in CYFS,
Ministry of Health, MOE, DSS, MSD, NASC, and all
the other professionals.
To say that dealing with the departments and ministries who are charged with
supporting us was extremely hard, often to breaking point, would be an
understatement. I have negotiated, argued, fought,
even took CYFS to court in a bid to advocate for the two young people that
had been given to us to raise.
Fighting, no matter the outcome, comes at a cost to family
life, to relationships, to trust, and
inevitably to one's health. I say fight
because that is what it becomes. Advocacy is too mild of a
description. Years and years of fighting takes a toll on every
aspect of your life, and your body lives in a constant fight or
flight mode as you await the next saga or battle
that someone in some office causes you to live because of
policies and legislation that are imposed without a real understanding
of the implications to real people.
An Australian study, which I'm happy to provide a link, showed mothers of
children with intellectual disability were 40% more likely to
die of cancer, 150% more likely to die of
cardiovascular disease, and nearly 200% more likely to die
from misadventure than other mothers.
I became one of those numbers in 2019 when I was
diagnosed with stage two cancer, and a year later, stage four.
While I cannot totally apportion this to the stress I have lived under
because of advocating and fighting for these two young people, I can say
with certainty that the continual living in fight or flight mode
would have played a huge part in that.
Our family is able to articulate our needs to advocate and fight when
necessary. We're resourceful, we're educated, and have held roles
that have put us in good stead to manage individualized funding.
We are open, honest, and transparent.
We will challenge systems, policies, and ministries if we feel that
things are unjust, unfair, or just plain stupid.
I feel for those who do not have these skills and who have to navigate the
system, the changes over the past two years, and this proposed
bill. One of my concerns with the bill is the broad, yet ambiguous
interpretation of family, which now includes in part
145, a person who acts as a parent, and B,
in a close relationship with A.
As a foster parent, I made a commitment to give this child a home for as long as
she needed it. And in that time, I did establish a close relationship
with her.
Not to would raise some serious concerns.
So now, according to this wording, I am family to all intents and
purposes. However, I was one of four guardians, the
state, hubby and I, and her birth mother.
Raising her was subject to state input, and I was never her parent in that
sense. Fostering does not change a person's birth certificate
or the responsibilities of family and state. Adoption, however, does.
Our names are shown as birth parents on our son's birth certificate,
and we willingly took on all the rights and responsibility of being his
parents. It is hard enough to get foster parents, let alone foster
parents for children with disabilities, and this act does not provide any
protection for foster parents going forward.
Another of my concerns is around means and asset testing, and while I
appreciate there is a level of this already in place, this has never been
applied to direct supports required.
The wording of this bill gives absolutely no assurance that this will not happen in
the future.
I definitely agree there is a need for a DSS framework.
However, I feel that this is a bit of a knee-jerk reaction, which has been rushed
and has had no input from the disability community.
And while I'm really grateful to be heard today, I feel that it does feel a
little bit like tokenism. Five minutes to speak on real people's lives,
concerns, and needs is somewhat limiting.
I'd like to see this whole bill scrapped and given the time and respect it
deserves, allowing people with disabilities and their families, their
supports, and their advocates to play an integral part in it.
If you've got any questions, fire away.
Oh, thank you. Thank you very much, Sharon.
We've gone a little bit over five minutes, so we've given you a bit longer.
But look-
No, thank you
... no, no. Thank you very much for making that submission, sharing your story
as well, and the story of your family and your
daughter and your children. And look, and giving us some
useful pointers for us to consider as a committee.
So look, I really appreciate that.
Excellent. Thank you.
Thank you. Have a good evening.
Okay.
Yeah.
Thanks. See you.
See you.
Bye.
Mr. Chair, the last submitter we're waiting on, we were able to get on the phone,
but we're not sure if they're going to be able to join.
I can give it four minutes in case you want to wait and see if they are able to
join. Otherwise, we don't have to-
Okay. Is he our last submitter?
Yes.
Okay.
All right.
Should we suspend for a couple of minutes and-
Sure
... see if we can raise him? Yeah.
Hey, guys. I'm done.
That was the last person I've got on the phone.
Oh, okay. So they should be here in a minute, Sharon,
yeah?